---
layout: post
title:  "Synthetic Biology"
tags: [ 'science', 'synthetic biology', 'CRISPR']
featured_image_thumbnail:
featured_image: assets/images/posts/2020/cell_drawings.jpg
featured: true
hidden: true
---

I grew up in a town huddled on the banks of a meandering river; a destination for Chicago dwellers seeking green space and clear waters. Shoppers arrived on the weekends, alighting from the Amtrak in the morning and then departing by the same train each night. The river cuts my town in two, splitting the earth between shops for visitors and homes for residents. In the summer, the rain falls with a vengeance, the river floods, basements are submerged, and the town retreats from its idyllic shores. In the fall, the river recedes and resumes its meandering pace. Boats return to the water, eager to bask in the last days of sunshine before winter.

The river in my hometown, then, follows an annual metronome, alternating between peaceful tide and torrential flood. This consistency has provided a backdrop to the duality in my own life, as I vacillate between science and writing.

As a teenager, I spent my evenings by the river, book in hand. The only things that came naturally to me during those years were reading and writing. Despite poor grades throughout high school, especially in math and science, I managed to get into the University of Iowa, where I planned to study journalism. But during the car ride west, as I escaped the flooded river for a new town, my older brother encouraged me to join a lab and build things with my hands. It would take my mind off classes, he said, and give me individual ownership over a project. I trusted my brother’s advice, but it would require effort to overcome my distrust in science — teachers repeatedly told me that college was “not for me”, based on my poor performance in science courses. Still, I figured that research was probably more interesting than rote memorization from a textbook, which was the preferred teaching style during high school.

In my first week in Iowa City, I sent a wave of emails to professors, and one accepted me into his research group; [Prof. E. Dale Abel](https://abel.lab.uiowa.edu/). I was soon studying insulin signaling and heart failure in transgenic mice, learning skills that ranged from fluorescent microscopy to rodent ultrasounds and histology. It only took a few weeks to become totally immersed in the research; I loved zooming in on tiny cells and running PCRs to genotype the animals. In the lab, I felt like I was a part of something important. A few months after joining the group, I switched my major to biochemistry. For the next four years, I stayed in that lab and refused to leave even during the summers. On the weekends, I rode my bike across the Iowa River, eager to rejoin my mice and perform more experiments.

Though I studied biochemistry in college, I was fortunate in my college decision for another reason; it was located squarely within a literary community. My daily commute brought me past Kurt Vonnegut’s former home and the Iowa Writers’ Workshop. I was surrounded by literary giants and felt empowered to explore the duality in my interests. Away from the bench, and keen to share my discoveries, I took to writing in the evenings. The challenge of identifying a story, and then carefully choosing my words to share that story, was immensely rewarding. One of the first articles that I wrote was called “Iowa’s dwindling bee population is part of a larger, frightening trend”. Published in a local magazine, called Little Village, it highlighted the use of neonicotinoids in rural Iowa.

Eventually, my experiments in the lab became tedious. My pipetting became repetitive, as I repeated experiments dozens or hundreds of times. After a while, I became intrigued by synthetic biology, which I saw as a natural extension of biochemistry, albeit with an “engineering” mindset. Whereas my biochemistry experiments — like western blots and PCR — had already been perfected in the 1970s and 80s, synthetic biology felt like a topic where I could unleash my creativity in full. Without any synthetic biology labs on campus, I decided to start my own, co-founding the University of Iowa’s first iGEM team in 2017. One of my [first published articles](https://littlevillagemag.com/university-of-iowa-genetic-engineering-biodegradable-plastic/), for _Little Village Magazine_, was about this iGEM team.

After completing my undergraduate degree, I sailed across the Atlantic under a Fulbright banner to Imperial College London. I spent a year developing new CRISPR methods to engineer yeast for my masters in synthetic biology. I worked with [Dr. Rodrigo Ledesma-Amaro](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/r.ledesma-amaro) and [Prof. Tom Ellis](https://www.imperial.ac.uk/people/t.ellis), and managed to publish a few papers, file a patent, and, perhaps most importantly, continue my daily writing ritual, while in London. Every night, I raced home to my apartment near Russell Square and spent the early morning hours dashing out emails to scientists and fielding Skype calls for my stories. My written articles began as a hobby but were eventually published on different websites.

As my time in London ended, I started a PhD in Bioengineering at the California Institute of Technology, where I worked with [Prof. Rob Phillips](http://www.rpgroup.caltech.edu/) on projects related to gene expression in _E. coli_, but dropped out at the start of the pandemic. It was a difficult decision, compounded by fears of a new career, in a different place, without any financial security. Now, I study science journalism as an M.A. student at New York University. I spent seven years at the bench and always confined my writing to the evenings. Now, I plan to spend at least the next seven years doing the opposite; I still engage with scientists and think through new research ideas, but my career has reverted back to my teenage goals.

I returned home in June to visit my family after several years away. The river was flooded and the nearby trails submerged under three feet of water. One day, I grabbed an umbrella and walked down to the flooded banks. Standing on a bridge, with a train track overhead, I watched the torrents of water pound the concrete pillars beneath my feet. The river that normally flows at a leisurely pace had gathered its annual momentum, washing away weak-stemmed flowers and uprooting old trees. I stood on that bridge, in the rain, and watched the rebirth of my home.
In a few weeks, the waters will recede, visitors will return, and a fresh batch of life will bloom.

View my peer-reviewed articles on [Google Scholar](https://scholar.google.com/citations?user=KX9_OFEAAAAJ&hl=en)
_______________

Featured image from [Unsplash](https://unsplash.com/photos/HRjdJddvPu8). Created by Elena Mozhvilo.